Meta-Reinforcement Learning Robust to Distributional Shift Via
Performing Lifelong In-Context Learning

Tengye Xu 1 Zihao Li 1 Qinyuan Ren 1

Abstract

imize expected returns across any task sampled from the
task distribution. However, most meta-RL methods evaluate
their performance on tasks drawn from the same distribution, leaving the generalization capability, particularly with
frozen parameters, in Out-of-Distribution (OOD) tasks less
studied. This aspect is crucial for real-world applications,
as obtaining a comprehensive prior of all possible situations
an RL agent might encounter is challenging (Beck et al.,
2023).

A key challenge in Meta-Reinforcement Learning (meta-RL) is the task distribution shift, since
the generalization ability of most current metaRL methods is limited to tasks sampled from the
training distribution. In this paper, we propose
Posterior Sampling Bayesian Lifelong In-Context
Reinforcement Learning (PSBL), which is robust
to task distribution shift. PSBL meta-trains a variant of transformer to directly perform amortized
inference about the Predictive Posterior Distribution (PPD) of the optimal policy. Once trained, the
network can infer the PPD online with frozen parameters. The agent then samples actions from the
approximate PPD to perform online exploration,
which progressively reduces uncertainty and enhances performance in the interaction with the environment. This property is known as in-context
learning. Experimental results demonstrate that
PSBL significantly outperforms standard Meta
RL methods both in tasks with sparse rewards and
dense rewards when the test task distribution is
strictly shifted from the training distribution.

A popular approach in meta-RL is to meta-learn a good initialization of the network across tasks, requiring only a few
policy gradient steps for adaptation in test tasks (Finn et al.,
2017; Stadie et al., 2018; Zintgraf et al., 2019a). However,
when a task distribution shift occurs, these methods struggle
to provide a robust initialization for OOD tasks. Meanwhile,
the meta-RL algorithm degrades into a conventional RL algorithm, forcing the agent to start almost from scratch and
rely on policy gradients to tackle unseen tasks (Beck et al.,
2023). This process can necessitate millions of interactions
at test time, which is costly in real-world applications.
Another promising meta-RL approach involves metatraining a memory-augmented network to infer the task
distribution and a policy network conditioned on this distribution to maximize expected returns (Humplik et al., 2019;
Zintgraf et al., 2019b; Liu et al., 2021). Once trained, the
memory-augmented network can function as if performing online inference, achieving high data efficiency when
adapting new tasks sampled from the training distribution.
However, these methods often struggle to generalize to OOD
tasks. This is because the policy network, typically a simple feedforward network, lacks the capability to perform
approximate inference online, making it difficult to map
unseen task distributions to optimal actions.

1. Introduction
Overfitting and lack of generalization are considered as
the two of the main challenges for Deep Reinforcement
Learning (RL), which hinder the wide range of application
in the Real world (Rajeswaran et al., 2017; Zhang et al.,
2018; Cobbe et al., 2019; Fakoor et al., 2019; Song et al.,
2019; Mendonca et al., 2020). Recently, a growing number
of Meta-Reinforcement Learning (meta-RL) methods have
been proposed to tackle these issues by meta-learning policies that quickly adapt to unseen but similar tasks. Given a
task distribution, these meta-RL agents are trained to max-

To tackle these generalization challenges, we propose training a transformer-based network to directly perform amortized inference about the Predictive Posterior Distribution
(PPD) of the optimal policy. This can be accomplished
within an end-to-end posterior sampling framework in Reinforcement Learning. Once trained, the network can infer
the PPD online with frozen parameters. The agent then samples actions from the approximate PPD to perform online
exploration, thereby progressively reducing uncertainty and

1

College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, 38 Zheda Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.. Correspondence
to: Qinyuan Ren <renqinyuan@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

Meta-Reinforcement Learning Robust to Distributional Shift Via Performing Lifelong In-Context Learning

improving its performance in the interaction with the environment. This process give rise to an inherent characteristic
within the network, namely Lifelong In-context Learning,
an extended version of In-context Learning (Von Oswald
et al., 2023). Lifelong In-context Learning is defined as the
capability of a pretrained network with frozen parameters
to continuously improve its policy in context over an extended horizon until convergence. Consequently, through
performing lifelong in-context learning at meta-test time,
the pretrained network can quickly adapt to OOD tasks.

removed from PSBL, PSBL method reduces to this setting.
The main difference is that by minimizing the SL loss and
actor loss, the network trained in PSBL can perform approximate Bayesian Inference online. Then our agent can sample
from the approximate distribution to do online exploration,
progressively improving its performance.
Task Inference methods can be considered as a subset of
black box methods (Humplik et al., 2019; Zintgraf et al.,
2019b; 2021). Utilizing networks with memory, Task Inference methods meta-train a memory-augmented network
to infer the task distribution and a policy network conditioned on the task distribution to maximize the expected
returns. The The networks in Task Inference method can be
trained with privileged information (Humplik et al., 2019),
with contrastive learning loss (Fu et al., 2021), or with selfsupervised learning loss (Zhang et al., 2021). Once trained,
the network with memory can perform approximate inference about the task distribution online. Similarly, the network trained in PSBL also performs approximate inference
online. However, instead of inferring the task distribution,
the proposed method PSBL directly infers the distribution
of the Bayes-optimal policy, demonstrating superior generalization in OOD tasks.

The primary contribution in this work is proposing a metaRL method called Posterior Sampling Bayesian Lifelong
in-context Reinforcement Learning (PSBL). The proposed
method is robust to task distribution shift by performing lifelong in-context learning. PSBL is evaluated on the discrete
navigation tasks and continuous control tasks, where the
test task distribution is strictly different from the training
distribution. The experimental results demonstrate that the
trained network in PSBL can perform Lifelong in-context
Learning across episodes in tasks with sparse rewards and
within episodes in tasks with dense rewards. Therefore,
through performing Lifelong in-context Learning, PSBL
significantly outperforms standard meta RL methods especially in OOD tasks. The open-source implementation can
be found at https://github.com/xu-ye/PSBL-MetaRL.

Memory-based Meta learning Prior studies have demonstrated practically that a parametric memory-based network
can be trained to behave as if performing Bayesian inference
(Ritchie et al., 2016; Genewein et al., 2023). Recent studies
(Ortega et al., 2019; Mikulik et al., 2020) have theoretically
proven that Memory-based Meta learning methods can metatrain a fixed-parametric memory-based network to perform
amortized Bayesian inference online by minimizing sequential prediction errors over a task distribution. Leveraging
this property, we construct an in-context learner capable of
performing amortized Bayesian inference by minimizing
prediction errors.

2. Related Work
Meta-Reinforcement Learning Meta-Reinforcement
Learning (Meta-RL) primarily focuses on few-shot
adaptation to new tasks by leveraging knowledge learned
during meta-training Recent approaches mainly include
Policy Gradient (PPG) methods, Black-Box methods, and
Task Inference methods. PPG methods typically meta-learn
a good initialization of the network, requiring only a few
policy gradient steps for adaptation to test tasks (Finn et al.,
2017; Stadie et al., 2018; Zintgraf et al., 2019a). However,
when a task distribution shift occurs, these methods struggle
to provide a robust initialization for OOD tasks. Meanwhile,
these meta-RL algorithms degrades into a conventional RL
algorithm, forcing the agent to start almost from scratch and
rely on policy gradients to tackle unseen tasks (Beck et al.,
2023). This process can necessitate millions of interactions
at test time, which is costly in real-world applications.

In-Context Learning In-context Learning is an approach
where pre-trained models improve their policies by utilizing
the context provided during inference, without the need for
gradient updates. An increasing number of works focus
on studying this phenomenon and try to provide theoretical explanations (Akyürek et al., 2022; Von Oswald et al.,
2023). In-context Learning has initially emerged from large
language models and now is being extended to decisionmaking (Laskin et al., 2022) and other domains. Recently,
Grigsby (2023) has proposed AMAGO, an in-context learning method designed to address meta-RL tasks and longhorizon RL tasks. However, the experimental results in
Section 5 demonstrate that PSBL outperforms AMAGO
both in asymptotic performance and training data efficiency.

In contrast to PPG methods, black-box methods utilize recurrent neural networks to learn history-dependent policies
for fast adaptation to new tasks (Duan et al., 2016; Wang
et al., 2016; Fakoor et al., 2019). Recently, many blackbox methods have shifted from recurrent networks to other
memory-augmented networks, such as those incorporating
attention mechanisms (Mishra et al., 2017) and transformers
(Melo, 2022). If the Supervised Learning (SL) loss, the
Posterior Sampling setting and the dynamic window are

Posterior Sampling in Reinforcement Learning Posterior
Sampling in Reinforcement Learning refers to a set of methods (Osband et al., 2013; Rakelly et al., 2019) where the
2

Meta-Reinforcement Learning Robust to Distributional Shift Via Performing Lifelong In-Context Learning

agent samples a MDP from its posterior distribution and
taking optimal actions based on the sampled MDP. As the
agent observes new data, this distribution of MDPs is updated, allowing it to make decisions that balance exploration
and exploitation based on the uncertainty in its knowledge.
These methods (Osband et al., 2013; Rakelly et al., 2019)
have demonstrated high data efficiency with performance
comparable to state-of-the-art RL methods. However, because exploration is guided by a single sampled MDP rather
than the full distribution, these traditional Posterior Sampling methods can lead to suboptimal exploration (Beck
et al., 2023). Therefore, instead of sampling an MDP from
its distribution, PSBL directly sample a near-optimal action
from the posterior distribution of the optimal policy.

tributional shift, we propose training a transformer-based
network to directly perform amortized Bayesian inference
online within an Posterior Sampling framework for MetaReinforcement Learning.
3.2. Posterior Sampling for Meta-Reinforcement
Learning
In the formulation of Posterior Sampling for MetaReinforcement Learning, it is assumed that each MDP
M is attached with an optimal policy. Thus, we can define the world model of each task by a transition model
P (ot+1 |θ, τt ), a reward model P (rt |θ, τt ) and an optimal
policy P (at+1 |θ, τt ), where the θ is the parameters of the
world model and τt = {o0 , a0 , r0 , o1 , a1 , r1 , . . . , ot , at } is
the interaction sequences from time step 0 to time step t.
The distribution over interaction sequences under the optimal policy of MDP M is defined as follows:

3. BACKGROUND
A standard Markov decision process can be defined by a
tuple M = (O, A, R, T , γ, H). O is a set of observations,
A stands for a set of actions. R represents a reward function and T is the transition function. γ is the discount
factor and H represents the horizon. The objective of the
agent is to maximize
discounted accumulated return
P the
defined by G =
λt R(st , at ). In this work, a metareinforcement learning setting is considered for training
a lifelong in-context learner that is robust to distributional
shift.

P (τT |θ) =

T
Y

P (rt−1 |θ, τt−1 )P (ot |θ, τt−1 )P (at |θ, τt−1 ).

t

(1)
When the MDP is unknown, the distribution over interaction
sequences can inferred as follows,
Z
P (τT ) = P (τT |θ)P (θ).
(2)
Posterior Sampling can be characterized as directly sampling predicted optimal action, observation and reward from
the Posterior Predictive Distribution of these variables in
the world model,
Z
at+1 ∼ P (at+1 |τt ) = P (at+1 |θ, τt )P (θ|τt ), (3)

3.1. Training Setup
In the standard meta-reinforcement learning setting, there is
a distribution P (M ) over MDPs representing various tasks
that differ in rewards and transition functions but share a
similar structure. The training horizon extends to H + , encompassing N episodes H + = N H. At meta-training time,
batches of MDPs are repeatedly sampled from the distribution M ∼ P (M ), and the agent is trained to maximize
the accumulated returns across these tasks. At meta-test
time, the meta-RL agent is evaluated on its ability to adapt
quickly to new tasks sampled from the same distribution
P (M ) used during training.

Z
ot+1 ∼ P (ot+1 |τt ) =

P (ot+1 |θ, τt )P (θ|τt ),

(4)

P (rt |θ, τt )P (θ|τt ).

(5)

Z
rt ∼ P (rt |τt ) =

The objective of Posterior Sampling is to minimize the cross
entropy between the PPD and its approximation,

The standard meta-reinforcement learning setting is modified in this work to promote training a lifelong in-context
learner that is robust to distributional shift. The evaluation
horizon at meta-test time is extended from H + to L , a
significantly longer period than the training horizon. This
extended horizon allows the agent to continuously improve
its performance through interaction with the environment
until convergence. Moreover, the tasks at meta-test time are
set to be drawn from a distribution strictly different from the
training distribution, enabling the evaluation of robustness
to distributional shifts.

J (qδ ) = Eτt ∼P (τt ) [H (P (· | τt ), qϕ (· | τt ))]

(6)

where q is the memory-augmented network to be trained in
Posterior Sampling with parameters ϕ. By minimizing the
prediction error, the network can directly perform amortized
inference about the PPD of the optimal policy, as theoretically proven in (Ortega et al., 2019; Mikulik et al., 2020).
Furthermore, the PPD of the optimal policy captures both
the predictive optimal actions and their associated uncertainties. By repeatedly sampling actions from the approximate
PPD, the agent can efficiently explore online and adapt to
new tasks with high data efficiency.

To train a lifelong in-context learner that is robust to dis3

Meta-Reinforcement Learning Robust to Distributional Shift Via Performing Lifelong In-Context Learning

Posterior Sampling is powerful for training a network to perform amortized inference of the PPD about the optimal policy. However, applying the Posterior Sampling framework
in meta-reinforcement learning, particularly for training a
lifelong in-context learner, can be nearly intractable. The
main challenges are as follows:

A more desirable approach is to directly sample action from
the approximated PPD of the optimal policy rather than first
sampling a MDP from the approximate PPD of MDPs and
then sampling actions from a policy based on the sampled
MDP. The desirable approach is as follows,
Z
at+1 ∼ P (at+1 |τt ) = P (at+1 |θ, τt )P (θ|τt ). (9)

• The true optimal policy for each MDP is unknown,
Considering a prior work (Muller et al., 2021) has proved
that Transformers can perform Bayesian Inference, a variant of the transformer network, named Lifelong In-context
Learning Transformer (LILTrans), is used in this work to
directly approximate the PPD of the optimal policy. The
LILTrans, parameterized by qϕ , functions as follows,

• Computation of the PPD is often intractable, and
• Even with an accurate PPD, Posterior Sampling methods can only train agent in a fixed horizon whereas
lifelong in-context learning requires an almost infinite
evaluation horizon.

rt , ot+1 , at+1 = qϕ (τt ).

4. Posterior Sampling Bayesian Lifelong
In-context Reinforcement Learning

To train the network in terms of cross entropy, we proposed
a Supervised Learning (SL) loss for the predicted rewards
and observations, whose true values are accessible in the
next time step. The SL loss is defined as follows,

In this section, a new meta-reinforcement learning method
called Posterior Sampling Bayesian Lifelong In-context Reinforcement Learning (PSBL) is proposed to address the
aforementioned challenges. This section starts by explaining how to approximate the PPD using a memory-based
network. This section then details a method to obtain a
Bayes-optimal policy for supervisory signals and presents
an approach to enable lifelong in-context learning over an
extended evaluation horizon. Finally, this section describes
an specially designed Transformer-based network and integrates all these components to summarize the new approach
PSBL.

ℓs = Eτt ∼P (τt ) [− log qϕ (ot+1 , rt |τt )],

It is proved in Appendix A that minimizing the SL loss ℓs
and the optimal policy loss ℓa can lead to an approximation
of the PPD in terms of cross-entropy.
4.1.

Computing the Predictive Posterior Distribution in closed
form is almost intractable for most cases, since the true
model of the current MDP is unknown and marginalising
over MDPs is computationally infeasible. Consequently,
the PPD can only be approximated for most cases. Classic
Posterior Sampling methods, such as PSRL (Osband et al.,
2013), PSDRL (Sasso et al., 2023), PEARL (Rakelly et al.,
2019), typically approximate the posterior distribution of
MDPs P (θ|τt ) first, then sample one MDP θ1 from the
posterior distribution,
P (θ)P (τt | θ)
.
P (θ′ ) P (τt | θ′ ) dθ′

4.2. Meta Learning an Bayes-Optimal Policy
The optimal policy loss (18) requires expert-provided optimal actions as supervisory signals. However, expert policies
are not available for most cases except for toy tasks. Thus,
a meta reinforcement learning method is used in this work
to obtain a Bayes-Optimal Policy.
The Bay-Optimal policy can be characterized as maximizing
the expected accumulated returns. The training objective is
as follows,
 +

H
X
J + (π) = Eτ,π 
γ t R (τt , ot+1 , at+1 ) .
(13)

(7)

Based on the sampled MDP, these methods compute and
follow its optimal policy in the following episode,
at+1 ∼ P (at+1 | θ1 , τt ).

(11)

Assuming an optimal policy exists for each MDP, the optimal policy loss is defined as follows,
h

i
ℓa =Eτt DKL qϕ (at+1 | τt ) P (at+1 | τt ) .
(12)

4.1. End to End PPD Approximation With LILTrans

θ1 ∼ P (θ | τt ) = R

(10)

t=0

(8)
Since the optimal policy in unknown, during training we
only have access to interaction sequences generated by a
current policy π. Therefore, the distribution over interaction
sequences under the current policy is as follows,

As shown in (7)(8), the policy used for exploration heavily
relies on the sampled MDP rather than the full distribution
of MDPs. This process can result in sub-optimal exploration.
4

Meta-Reinforcement Learning Robust to Distributional Shift Via Performing Lifelong In-Context Learning

Algorithm 1 PSBL Meta-Training
Require: Batch of training MDPs sampled from P (M ),
dynamic window capacity b
Initialize replay buffer D
while not done do
for each sampled MDP M do
Initialize interaction sequences τ
for k = 1, . . . , N do
for l = 1, . . . , H do
At time step t = kH + l
Sample at+1 ∼ qϕ (at+1 | τ )
Gather data ot+1 , rt from the MDP
Update τ with {rt , t + 1, dt+1 , ot+1 , at+1 , }
end for
Update the replay buffer D with τ
if k > b then
Discard the earliest k − b episode from τ
end if
end for
end for
for step in training steps do
for batches of τ sampled from D do
Compute the PPD from qϕ (o, r | τ )
Ls ← Ls + ℓs (qϕ (o, r | τ ), τ )
Sample a ∼ qϕ (a | τ )
Lc ← Lc + ℓc (a, τ )
La ← La + ℓa (a, τ )
end for
ϕ ← ϕ − α ▽ϕ (λs Ls + λa La + λc Lc )
end for
end while

Algorithm 2 PSBL Meta-Testing
Require: test MDPs M sampled from P (M ) or out of
the P (M ), network qϕ , evaluation horizon L
Initialize interaction sequences τ
for k = 1, . . . , L do
for l = 1, . . . , H do
At time step t = kH + l
Sample at+1 ∼ qϕ (at+1 | τ )
Roll out action at+1 and collect data ot+1 , rt
Update τ with {rt , t + 1, dt+1 , ot+1 , at+1 , }
end for
if k > b then
Discard the earliest k − b episode from τ
end if
end for
function ℓc based on the TD error as follows,
i2
h
π
ℓc = Eπ Qπ (at+1 , τt ) − (rt+1 + λQ (at+2 , τt+1 )) ,
(16)
where at+2 ∼ π(at+2 | τt+1 ) samples from the current
policy π, Q is the target Q network.
To regress the policy network to the true optimal policy,
we use simulated annealing (Ortega et al., 2019). It can
gradually converge to the optimal policy. The Bayes-optimal
policy can be computed as

exp α1 Q(at+1 , τt )
P (at+1 | τt ) ≈ π(at+1 | τt ) =
.
Z(τt )
(17)

P
where Z(τt ) = a′ exp α1 Q(a′t+1 | τt ) .
t+1

P π (τt ) =

Z
P (θ)
θ

T
Y

According to (11) (17), we can get the final optimal policy
loss ℓa as follows,
"
 !#
exp α1 Q(at+1 , τt )
ℓa =Eτt DKL qϕ (at+1 | τt )
.
Z(τt )
(18)
Therefore, the overall training objective is to maximize,

P (rt−1 | θ, τt−1 )P (ot | θ, τt−1 )

t

π(at | τt−1 ).
(14)
Furthermore, we define a state-action function Qπ (at+1 , τt )
for the policy π as the expected accumulated discounted
rewards given a past interaction sequence. The state-action
function is defined as
Qπ (at+1 , τt ) = Eπ

h H
X

L = λs ℓs + λa ℓa + λc ℓc ,

(19)

where the λs , λa , λc are the weighted coefficients of SL
loss ℓs , optimal policy loss ℓa , critic loss ℓc , individually.

i
λ(k−t) R(τk , ak+1 , ok+1 ) τt , at+1 ,

k=t

4.3. Meta-train an Lifelong In-context Learner
With the overall training objective (19), PSBL meta-trains
the LILTrans network to perform in-context learning within
a fixed horizon H + when adapting to an unseen task. However, if the test task distribution differs significantly from the
training distribution, the fixed horizon H + may be insufficient for the agent to continuously improve its performance
until convergence. Therefore, a dynamic window and time

(15)
where Eπ := Eτt ∼P π (τt ) denotes an expectation w.r.t. the
distribution P π (τt ). Thus, an optimal policy is one that
maximizes this function at any time step for any MDP.
The state-action function can be approximated by a Q network parameterized by ϕ. We define an instantaneous loss
5

Meta-Reinforcement Learning Robust to Distributional Shift Via Performing Lifelong In-Context Learning

(a)

(b)

Meta-test
p(a𝑡𝑡+1 |𝜏𝜏𝑡𝑡 )
p(𝑜𝑜𝑡𝑡+1 |𝜏𝜏𝑡𝑡 )
p( 𝑟𝑟𝑡𝑡 |𝜏𝜏𝑡𝑡 )

𝑎𝑎𝑡𝑡+𝐵𝐵+1 ~𝑃𝑃 (𝑎𝑎𝑡𝑡+𝐵𝐵+1 |𝜏𝜏𝑡𝑡+𝐵𝐵 )

p(a𝑡𝑡+B+1 |𝜏𝜏𝑡𝑡+𝐿𝐿 )
p(𝑜𝑜𝑡𝑡+𝐵𝐵+1 |𝜏𝜏𝑡𝑡+𝐿𝐿 )
p( 𝑟𝑟𝑡𝑡+𝐵𝐵 |𝜏𝜏𝑡𝑡+𝐿𝐿 )

……
……

……
……

Feed
Forward

Transformer
Encoders with
𝜎𝜎Reparam

𝑜𝑜𝑡𝑡+𝐵𝐵+1
′
𝑟𝑟𝑡𝑡+𝐵𝐵+1
𝑑𝑑𝑡𝑡+𝐵𝐵+1
𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡+𝐵𝐵+1

Transformers can do Lifelong In-context Learning

𝑜𝑜𝑡𝑡 , 𝑎𝑎𝑡𝑡 , 𝑟𝑟𝑡𝑡′ , 𝑑𝑑𝑡𝑡 , 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡

Feed
Forward

p(a𝑡𝑡+1 |𝜏𝜏𝑡𝑡 )

Z

LILTrans

𝑜𝑜0 , 𝑎𝑎0 , 𝑟𝑟0′ , 𝑑𝑑0 , 𝑡𝑡0 …

𝑀𝑀

p(𝑜𝑜𝑡𝑡+1 |𝜏𝜏𝑡𝑡 )
p( 𝑟𝑟𝑡𝑡 |𝜏𝜏𝑡𝑡 )

′
𝑜𝑜𝑡𝑡+B , 𝑎𝑎𝑡𝑡+𝐵𝐵 , 𝑟𝑟𝑡𝑡+𝐵𝐵
, 𝑑𝑑𝑡𝑡+𝐵𝐵 , 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡+𝐵𝐵

…

Time Embedding

𝑜𝑜𝑡𝑡 , 𝑎𝑎𝑡𝑡 , 𝑟𝑟𝑡𝑡′ , 𝑑𝑑𝑡𝑡 , 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡

Figure 1. (a) Meta-Testing Procedure: The LILTrans uses the interaction sequences τ to infer the posterior distribution of the Bayesoptimal policy, reward and next observation. Then the action is directly sampled from the approximate PPD of the Bayes-optimal policy.
After executing the action, the data, including the next observation and reward, is collected to form the next interaction sequences τ .
The dynamic window rolls forward, prompting LILTrans to carry out the next round of amortized Bayesian inference. This process
allows the agent to progressively reduce uncertainty about the optimal action and improve its performance. In essence, LILTrans is
performing lifelong in-context learning during the meta-test phase. (b) LILTrans Network Architecture: Once trained, LILTrans is
robust to distributional shift by performing lifelong in-context learning.

where k is the episode index and l indicates the time index
within an episode. t = kH + l denotes the current time step,
t0 = max[(k − b + 1)H, 0] represents the start time step of
the dynamic window.

embedding are specially designed in this work to enable an
almost infinite evaluation horizon.
The Dynamic Window includes only the most recent b
episodes, allowing the transformer-based network to process interaction sequences within this window. Thus, a
transformer-based network trained on a fixed horizon can
be applied to lifelong interactions by continuously rolling
the dynamic window forward.

Therefore, we summarize our training procedure in Algorithm 1 and describe Meta-testing procedure in Figure 2 and
Algorithm 2.
4.4. Adapting Transformers for Lifelong In-context
Learning

However, a dynamic window alone is insufficient for training a lifelong in-context learner. When the MDP is unknown,
the agent’s behavior should vary across different episodes.
For instance, the agent might focus on exploration during
the first b episodes and shift to exploitation in subsequent
episodes. To distinguish these interaction sequences, we
add time embedding to the interaction sequences τ . The
updated interaction sequence is defined as follows:

In this work, a variant of transformer network is specifically proposed for tackling the Lifelong In-Context Learning
problem, called LILTrans. Essentially, LILTrans functions
as a state machine, making it well-suited for online learning.
The LILTrans, visualized in Figure 2a, is based on Transformer encoders with a time Embedding network and two
feedforward networks. To prevent performance collapse during training, we adopt several existing techniques to modify
the original structure from (Vaswani et al., 2017). Details
can be found in Appendix B.1.

τt0 :t1 = {t̂0 , dt0 , ot0 , at0 , rt0 , . . . , t̂1 , dt1 , ot1 , at1 } (20)
where t̂0 = Ht0+ represents the relative time step, and dt
denotes whether the episode is reset at time step.
At meta-training time, the dynamic window rolls forward
N − b times, enabling the agent to learn to balance exploration and exploitation across different episodes. Consequently, the training objective for the Bayes-optimal policy
is redefined as follows:
"N H
#
XX
t
+
J (π) = Eτ,π
γ R (τt0 :t , ot+1 , at+1 ) , (21)

At time step t, the time Embedding network ft first embeds the interaction sequences τ . The transformer Encoders
then process the embedding and output two latent variables
z1 , z2 ,
z1 , z2 = Encoders(ft (τ )).
(22)
The latent variables Z = [z1 , z2 ] provide a compact repre-

k=0 l=0

6

Meta-Reinforcement Learning Robust to Distributional Shift Via Performing Lifelong In-Context Learning

Figure 2. Average test performance in both ID and strictly OOD tasks in 64 parallel environments (using 3 seeds). PSBL enables the
trained network to perform lifelong in-context learning across episodes with sparse rewards. Furthermore, PSBL significantly outperforms
other methods in OOD tasks.

sentation of the interaction sequences τ , which are utilized
in the state-action network Qπ (at+1 , Z).

tasks with dense rewards, are conducted to evaluated the performance of PSBL. The experimental results demonstrate
that the trained network in PSBL can perform Lifelong
in-context Learning across episodes in tasks with sparse rewards and within episodes in tasks with dense rewards. Furthermore, PSBL significantly outperforms standard meta RL
methods especially in OOD tasks. Finally, several ablation
studies are conducted to to better understand the proposed
method PSBL.

Finally, the two latent variables are individually fed into two
feedforward networks, f1 and f2 . These networks return the
approximate PPD of the optimal policy, rewards, and next
observations. Therefore, the proposed LILTrans network
can compute two functions gϕ and hϕ with the paramaters
ϕ as follows,
et+1 = hϕ (at , (ot , rt−1 ), τt−1 )
a
(e
ot+1 , ret ) = gϕ (at , (ot , rt−1 ), τt−1 )

(23)

5.1. Discrete Navigation Meta-RL Tasks
We consider environments that requires task inference and
online exploration. The first is Gridworld, a discrete navigation environment where the agent needs to infer the optimal
route to an unknown goal position. The agent receives a
reward of +1 upon reaching the goal and −1 otherwise. The
second is Dark-Key-to-Door, a more complex navigation
environment where the agent needs to find a key first and
then use the key to open the door. The start, key and door
position are unknown to the agent. The agent receives a
reward of +1 both in finding the key and opening the door.

that map the input current action, previous state-reward pair
and previous interaction sequence (at , (ot , rt−1 ), τt−1 ) to
the next action e
at+1 and the next state-reward pair (e
ot+1 , ret ),
respectively. Here, hϕ is the output function and gϕ is the
state transition function. Therefore, equation (23) defines
a state machine that is well-suited for online learning or
in-context learning.

5. Experiments
In this section, various experiments, including discrete navigation tasks with sparse rewards and continuous control

To evaluate the performance of PSBL in environments with

7

Meta-Reinforcement Learning Robust to Distributional Shift Via Performing Lifelong In-Context Learning

Figure 3. Average test performance in both ID and strictly OOD tasks in 64 parallel environments (using 3 seeds). PSBL enables the
trained network to perform lifelong in-context learning within one or two episodes with dense rewards. Furthermore, PSBL significantly
outperforms other methods in OOD tasks.

sparse rewards, we compare PSBL with state-of-the-art incontext RL methods and context-based Meta RL methods,
including AMAGO (Grigsby et al., 2023), VariBAD (Zintgraf et al., 2019b), RL2 (Duan et al., 2016). Detailed introductions of these methods are provided in Appendix B.2.

line methods. It can be seen that at meta-test time, the
trained network in PSBL progressively improve its performance until convergence both in ID and OOD test tasks
through interactions with the environments. Furthermore,
when the evaluation time step exceeds the learning horizon,
PSBL continues to demonstrate improvement until convergence, whereas the performance of other baseline methods
declines. These phenomenon indicates the emergence of
Lifelong In-context Learning across episodes within the
trained network in PSBL.

All of these methods are trained from scratch in the default
environment setting. The detailed environmental setting are
in Appendix B.3. Hyperparameters of PSBL during training
are provided in Appendix B.4. The learning curves of all
these algorithms, shown in the Appendix B.5, show that
PSBL is much sample efficient than baselines. Once trained,
we evaluate the trained networks both in in-distribution (ID)
and out-of-distribution (OOD) tasks. Specifically speaking,
in gridworld environments, we evaluate the networks trained
on 5x5 grid worlds by navigating 5x5, 6x6, 7x7 and 8x8 grid
worlds with randomly sampled goal positions. In Dark-Keyto-Door environments, we evaluate networks trained on 9x9
rooms worlds by navigating 9x9, 10x10, 11x11 and 12x12
rooms with randomly sampled start, key and door positions.
For fair comparison, each method is evaluated in 64 parallel
randomly sampled environments using 3 seeds, and the
averaged returns are used to compare their test performance.

Through performing lifelong in-context learning, PSBL significantly outperform other methods in OOD tasks. Although the VariBAD method adapts more quickly to ID
tasks than PSBL, its test performance declines dramatically
when the task distribution shifts. This is because VariBAD’s
base policy network, being a simple feedforward network
without online inference capability, struggles to map the
unseen task distribution to a near-optimal policy.
Overall, the experimental results confirm that the PSBLtrained network can perform lifelong in-context learning
across episodes in tasks with sparse rewards, significantly
outperforming other methods in OOD tasks.

Figure 2 shows the evaluation results of PSBL and the base8

Meta-Reinforcement Learning Robust to Distributional Shift Via Performing Lifelong In-Context Learning

5.2. Mujoco Continuous Control Meta-RL Tasks

 2 2 '   * U L G Z R U O G    [ 

  

We demonstrate that PSBL can scale to continuous control tasks with dense rewards by evaluating it in Mujoco
environments, which are commonly used as benchmarks
(Zintgraf et al., 2019b; Rakelly et al., 2019). These locomotion tasks require online inference and fast adaptation across
the reward functions (randomly generated target velocity
for HalfCheetah-Vel) and the transition functions (randomly
sampled environment properties for Walker-2D-Param).

 D O J R

 3 6 % / B 0   B +  
 3 6 % / B 0   B +  
 3 6 % / B 0  B +  

 $ Y H U D J H  5 H W X U Q V

 

To evaluate the performance of PSBL in continuous tasks
with dense rewards, we compare the PSBL to four methods, including AMAGO, VariBAD, RL2 , PEARL (Rakelly
et al., 2019). Detailed introductions of these methods are
provided in Appendix B.2. All methods are trained from
scratch in the default environment settings, detailed in Appendix B.3. Learning curves for all algorithms, shown in
Appendix B.5, indicate that PSBL achieves comparable data
efficiency to PEARL and is more sample-efficient than the
other baselines.

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

  

  

 ( S L V R G H

  

  

  

Figure 4. Ablation Experiment Results: We compare PSBL to two
variants with different horizon and memory lengths.

Length) while the training horizon contains 20 episodes
(Horizon Length). We consider two other configurations for
the dynamic window:

Once trained, we evaluate the trained networks both in ID
tasks and OOD tasks. Specifically speaking, in the benchmark of Half-Cheetah-Vel, we evaluate the networks trained
at velocity of 0 ∼ 3m/s by following the new target velocities sampled from 0 ∼ 3, 3 ∼ 3.5, 3.5 ∼ 4 and 4 ∼ 4.5 m/s
. In the benchmark of Walker-2D-Param, we evaluate the
networks trained in environments with parameters random
scale at 3 by controlling the walker to walk forward with
parameters random at 3, 4, 5 and 6. For fair comparison,
these methods are evaluated in 64 parallel randomly sampled environments using 3 seeds, and the averaged returns
are used to compare their test performance.

• PSBL method with a horizon length of 20 and a memory length of 20.
• PSBL method with a horizon length of 12 and a memory length of 6.
The test performance of these variants is evaluated in the
OOD task Grid-World 6x6. The results, shown in Figure
4, demonstrate that PSBL with a horizon length of 20 and
a memory length of 10 outperforms PSBL with a horizon
length of 20 and a memory length of 20, as the dynamic
window in the latter does not progress forward. Furthermore, the results show that PSBL with a horizon length of
20 and a memory length of 10 outperforms PSBL with a
horizon length of 12 and a memory length of 6. Hence, a
longer memory length and horizon length prove beneficial
for retaining the past interaction sequence and improving
policy in the context

Figure 4 presents the experimental results in continuous control tasks. We can observe that PSBL adapts to OOD tasks
almost within the first or second episodes, achieving significantly higher average returns than other methods especially
in OOD tasks. That is because PSBL quickly reduces the uncertainty of near-optimal policy in tasks with dense rewards,
allowing the uncertainty to converge to a rough point mass
within one or two episodes. Consequently, PSBL enables
lifelong in-context learning within episodes for these tasks.
Moreover, PSBL significantly outperforms other methods in
OOD tasks, and its superiority becomes more pronounced
as the distance between test and training task distributions
increases.

6. Conclusion
In this work, we propose PSBL, a new Meta-RL method
robust to distribution shifts through lifelong in-context learning. PSBL is evaluated on discrete navigation tasks and
continuous control tasks, where test task distributions differ significantly from training distributions. Experimental
results demonstrate that PSBL enables lifelong in-context
learning across episodes for tasks with sparse rewards and
within episodes for tasks with dense rewards. Consequently,
through performing Lifelong in-context Learning, PSBL
significantly outperforms standard Meta-RL methods, especially in OOD tasks.

5.3. Ablations
In this section, we ablate our approach to better understand
its key features. Several ablation experiments are conducted
to evaluate the importance of the dynamic window and
its hyperparameters. In the grid-world tasks, the dynamic
window in PSBL is set to contain 10 episodes (Memory
9

Meta-Reinforcement Learning Robust to Distributional Shift Via Performing Lifelong In-Context Learning

Impact Statement

Humplik, J., Galashov, A., Hasenclever, L., Ortega, P. A.,
Teh, Y. W., and Heess, N. Meta reinforcement learning as
task inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.06424, 2019.

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field
of Machine Learning. There are many potential societal
consequences of our work, none which we feel must be
specifically highlighted here.

Langley, P. Crafting papers on machine learning. In Langley,
P. (ed.), Proceedings of the 17th International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML 2000), pp. 1207–1216, Stanford, CA, 2000. Morgan Kaufmann.

Acknowledgements

Laskin, M., Wang, L., Oh, J., Parisotto, E., Spencer, S.,
Steigerwald, R., Strouse, D., Hansen, S., Filos, A.,
Brooks, E., et al. In-context reinforcement learning with
algorithm distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.14215,
2022.

This work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation, China (No.62173300)

References
Akyürek, E., Schuurmans, D., Andreas, J., Ma, T., and
Zhou, D. What learning algorithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.15661, 2022.

Liu, E. Z., Raghunathan, A., Liang, P., and Finn, C. Decoupling exploration and exploitation for meta-reinforcement
learning without sacrifices. In International conference
on machine learning, pp. 6925–6935. PMLR, 2021.

Beck, J., Vuorio, R., Liu, E. Z., Xiong, Z., Zintgraf, L., Finn,
C., and Whiteson, S. A survey of meta-reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.08028, 2023.

Melo, L. C. Transformers are meta-reinforcement learners. In international conference on machine learning, pp.
15340–15359. PMLR, 2022.

Cobbe, K., Klimov, O., Hesse, C., Kim, T., and Schulman,
J. Quantifying generalization in reinforcement learning.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
1282–1289. PMLR, 2019.

Mendonca, R., Geng, X., Finn, C., and Levine, S. Metareinforcement learning robust to distributional shift via
model identification and experience relabeling. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.07178, 2020.

Duan, Y., Schulman, J., Chen, X., Bartlett, P. L., Sutskever,
I., and Abbeel, P. Rl ˆ2: Fast reinforcement learning via slow reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.02779, 2016.

Mikulik, V., Delétang, G., McGrath, T., Genewein, T., Martic, M., Legg, S., and Ortega, P. Meta-trained agents
implement bayes-optimal agents. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 33:18691–18703, 2020.

Fakoor, R., Chaudhari, P., Soatto, S., and Smola, A. J. Metaq-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00125, 2019.

Mishra, N., Rohaninejad, M., Chen, X., and Abbeel, P.
A simple neural attentive meta-learner. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.03141, 2017.

Finn, C., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Model-agnostic metalearning for fast adaptation of deep networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1126–1135.
PMLR, 2017.

Muller, S., Hollmann, N., Arango, S. P., Grabocka, J.,
and Hutter, F. Transformers can do bayesian inference. ArXiv, abs/2112.10510, 2021. URL https:
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
245334722.

Fu, H., Tang, H., Hao, J., Chen, C., Feng, X., Li, D., and
Liu, W. Towards effective context for meta-reinforcement
learning: an approach based on contrastive learning. In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 7457–7465, 2021.

Ortega, P. A., Wang, J. X., Rowland, M., Genewein, T.,
Kurth-Nelson, Z., Pascanu, R., Heess, N., Veness, J.,
Pritzel, A., Sprechmann, P., et al. Meta-learning of sequential strategies. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.03030,
2019.

Genewein, T., Delétang, G., Ruoss, A., Wenliang, L. K.,
Catt, E., Dutordoir, V., Grau-Moya, J., Orseau, L., Hutter,
M., and Veness, J. Memory-based meta-learning on nonstationary distributions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03067,
2023.

Osband, I., Russo, D., and Van Roy, B. (more) efficient
reinforcement learning via posterior sampling. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.
Rajeswaran, A., Lowrey, K., Todorov, E. V., and Kakade,
S. M. Towards generalization and simplicity in continuous control. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 30, 2017.

Grigsby, J., Fan, L., and Zhu, Y. Amago: Scalable in-context
reinforcement learning for adaptive agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.09971, 2023.
10

Meta-Reinforcement Learning Robust to Distributional Shift Via Performing Lifelong In-Context Learning

Rakelly, K., Zhou, A., Finn, C., Levine, S., and Quillen, D.
Efficient off-policy meta-reinforcement learning via probabilistic context variables. In International conference on
machine learning, pp. 5331–5340. PMLR, 2019.

Zintgraf, L., Shiarli, K., Kurin, V., Hofmann, K., and Whiteson, S. Fast context adaptation via meta-learning. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7693–
7702. PMLR, 2019a.

Ritchie, D., Horsfall, P., and Goodman, N. D. Deep amortized inference for probabilistic programs. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1610.05735, 2016.

Zintgraf, L., Shiarlis, K., Igl, M., Schulze, S., Gal, Y., Hofmann, K., and Whiteson, S. Varibad: A very good method
for bayes-adaptive deep rl via meta-learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.08348, 2019b.

Sasso, R., Conserva, M., and Rauber, P. Posterior sampling for deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.00477, 2023.

Zintgraf, L. M., Feng, L., Lu, C., Igl, M., Hartikainen, K.,
Hofmann, K., and Whiteson, S. Exploration in approximate hyper-state space for meta reinforcement learning.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
12991–13001. PMLR, 2021.

Shleifer, S., Weston, J., and Ott, M. Normformer: Improved
transformer pretraining with extra normalization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2110.09456, 2021.
Song, X., Jiang, Y., Tu, S., Du, Y., and Neyshabur, B. Observational overfitting in reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1912.02975, 2019.
Stadie, B. C., Yang, G., Houthooft, R., Chen, X., Duan, Y.,
Wu, Y., Abbeel, P., and Sutskever, I. Some considerations
on learning to explore via meta-reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.01118, 2018.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones,
L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., and Polosukhin, I. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 30, 2017.
Von Oswald, J., Niklasson, E., Randazzo, E., Sacramento,
J., Mordvintsev, A., Zhmoginov, A., and Vladymyrov,
M. Transformers learn in-context by gradient descent.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
35151–35174. PMLR, 2023.
Wang, J. X., Kurth-Nelson, Z., Tirumala, D., Soyer, H.,
Leibo, J. Z., Munos, R., Blundell, C., Kumaran, D., and
Botvinick, M. Learning to reinforcement learn. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1611.05763, 2016.
Zhai, S., Likhomanenko, T., Littwin, E., Busbridge, D.,
Ramapuram, J., Zhang, Y., Gu, J., and Susskind, J. M.
Stabilizing transformer training by preventing attention
entropy collapse. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pp. 40770–40803. PMLR, 2023.
Zhang, C., Vinyals, O., Munos, R., and Bengio, S. A
study on overfitting in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1804.06893, 2018.
Zhang, J., Wang, J., Hu, H., Chen, T., Chen, Y., Fan, C., and
Zhang, C. Metacure: Meta reinforcement learning with
empowerment-driven exploration. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12600–12610. PMLR,
2021.
11

Meta-Reinforcement Learning Robust to Distributional Shift Via Performing Lifelong In-Context Learning

A. End to End PPD Approximation Guarantee
A.1. Supervised Learning Loss
Insight 1. The proposed SL loss ℓs is equal to the expectation of the cross-entropy between the PPD and its approximation
qϕ : ℓs = E ∗ τt [H (P (· | τt ), q ∗ δ(· | τt ))]
Proof.
Z
Z
Z
ℓs = −
p(ot+1 , rt , τt ) log qϕ (ot+1 , rt | τt ) = −
p(τt )
p(ot+1 , rt | τt ) log qϕ (ot+1 , rt | τt )
ot+1 ,rt ,τt
τt
ot+1 ,rt
Z
=
p(τt )H (p(· | τt ), qϕ (· | τt )) = E ∗ τt ∼ p(τt ) [H (p(· | τt ), q ∗ ϕ(· | τt ))]

(24)

τt

A.2. Actor Loss
Insight 2. The proposed actor loss ℓa is equal to the expectation of the cross-entropy between the PPD and its approximation,
up to an additive constant: qϕ : ℓa = E ∗ τt [H (P (· | τt ), q ∗ δ(· | τt ))] + C
Proof.
h

i
E ∗ τt D ∗ KL qϕ (at+1 | τt ) P (at+1 | τt )
Z

qδ (at+1 | τt )
= −E ∗ τt
∗at+1 P (at+1 | τt ) log
P (at+1 | τt )
Z

Z

= −E ∗ τt
∗at+1 P (at+1 | τt ) log qδ (at+1 | τt ) + E ∗ τt
∗at+1 P (at+1 | τt ) log P (at+1 | τt )

(25)

= E ∗ τt [H (P (· | τt ), q ∗ δ(· | τt ))] − E ∗ τt [H (P (· | τt ))]
= E ∗ τt [H (P (· | τt ), qδ (· | τt ))] + C

B. Implementation Details
B.1. LILTrans Network Architecture
To prevent performance collapse during training, particularly during long-horizon meta training, we incorporate three
existing methods: extra LayerNorms from Normformer (Shleifer et al., 2021), α− Reparam from (Zhai et al., 2023), and the
use of Leaky ReLU from AMAGO (Grigsby et al., 2023).
B.2. Baselines
• AMAGO (Grigsby et al., 2023). A Transformers-based In-context Reinforcement Learning method which specializes
in meta-learning, generalization and long-term memory. We use the open-source reference implementation of AMAGO
at https://github.com/ut-austin-rpl/amago. We keep all hyperparameters of AMAGO as the Default.
• VariBAD (Zintgraf et al., 2019b). A variational Bayes-Adaptive Deep RL which can online infer the task distribution
and incorporate task uncertainty during action selection. We use the open-source reference implementation of variBAD
at https://github.com/lmzintgraf/varibad to report the results of variBAD method. We keep all hyperparameters of
VariBAD as the Default.
• PEARL (Rakelly et al., 2019). A Probabilistic Context Variables based Meta RL method, which infer latent task
variables online and Posterior samples from the inferred distribution. We use the open-source reference implementation
of PEARL at https://github.com/ut-austin-rpl/amago. We keep all hyperparameters of PEARL as the Default.
12

Meta-Reinforcement Learning Robust to Distributional Shift Via Performing Lifelong In-Context Learning

• RL2 . (Duan et al., 2016) A classic context-based RL which utilize a recurrent neural network to quickly adapt to the
new task.We use the open-source reference implementation of RL2 at https://github.com/katerakelly/oysterto report the
results of RL2 method. We keep all hyperparameters of RL2 as the Default.
B.3. Environments Setting
• Gridworld. The horizon is set to the default value of 15, as described in VarBAD (Zintgraf et al., 2019b). The
gridworld is configured as a 5x5 grid. During training, the goal position is randomly sampled from any of the 25 grids
except (0,0), (0,1), (1,0), and (1,1). During meta-testing, the goal position is randomly selected from the 5x5 grid in ID
tasks and from 6x6, 7x7, and 8x8 grids in OOD tasks.
• Dark-Key-To-Door Consistent with AMAGO (Grigsby et al., 2023), the horizon is set to the default value of 50.
The training environment is a 9x9 room, with the start, key, and door positions randomly sampled from all possible
locations within the room. During meta-testing, these positions are randomly sampled from the 9x9 room in ID tasks,
and from 10x10, 11x11, and 12x12 rooms in OOD tasks.
• HalfCheetah-Vel Similar to VarBAD (Zintgraf et al., 2019b), the horizon is set to the default value of 200. The target
speed during training is randomly sampled from the range . During meta-testing, the target is totally randomly sampled
from the 0 ∼ 3 in ID tasks and from 3 ∼ 3.5, 3.5 ∼ 4 and 4 ∼ 4.5 in OOD tasks .
• Walker-2D-Param As in VarBAD (Zintgraf et al., 2019b), the horizon is set to the default value of 200. During
training, the environment parameters, including body mass, degree of freedom (dof) damping, body inertia, and geom
friction, are randomly altered by a factor of 3 at the beginning of each episode. During evaluation, the random scaling
factor for these parameters is set to 3 for ID tasks, and to 4, 5, and 6 for OOD tasks.
B.4. Hyperparameters
The network architecture details of PSBL for all test environments are listed in Table 1. The training hyperparameters for
PSBL across all test environments are provided in Table 2.
Table 1. PSBL Network Architecture Details For All Test Environments.
T RANSFORMER E NCODERS
MODEL D IM
FF D IM
H EADS
L AYERS

256
1024
8
3

OTHER NETWORKS
T IME E MBEDDING
CRITIC
F EEDFORWARD NETWORK

(128,128,64)
(256,256)
(128,128)

B.5. Learning Curves in Experiments
Figure 5 shows the learning curves for all environments presented in Section 5 for all methods. Since the open-source
reference implementation of PEARL can only address continuous tasks, the PEARL method is evaluated exclusively on
continuous tasks, including HalfCheetah-Vel and Walker-2D-Param.
It is evident that our method, PSBL, demonstrates higher sample efficiency than other methods in discrete tasks. However,
in continuous tasks, PEARL is slightly more sample-efficient in training than PSBL. This difference is attributed to the
memory-augmented network in PSBL, which is based on transformers and naturally requires more training data than
recurrent networks. In the Dark-Key-To-Door tasks, PSBL achieves significantly higher average returns than AMAGO,
VariBAD, and RL2 . Despite extensive hyperparameter tuning and more than 20 trials, the VariBAD method only converges
to suboptimal performance with average returns near 1 in the Dark-Key-To-Door tasks

13

Meta-Reinforcement Learning Robust to Distributional Shift Via Performing Lifelong In-Context Learning

Table 2. PSBL Trainning Hyperparameters

L EARNING R ATE
L2 P ENALTY
BATCH S IZE
M AX B UFFER S IZE
G RADIENT U PDATES P ER E POCH
TARGET U PDATE τ
G RADIENT C LIP (N ORM )
ACTOR L OSS W EIGHT
C RITIC L OSS W EIGHT
SL L OSS W EIGHT
PARALLEL ACTORS
M EMORY LENGTH ( EPISODES )
HORIZON LENGTH ( EPISODES )
E XPLORATION M AX ϵAT E P. S TART
E XPLORATION M AX ϵ AT E P. E ND

G RIDWORLD

DARK -K EY-D OOR

H ALFCHEEH -V EL

WALKER -2D-PARAM

5 E -5
1 E -4
24
20000
2000
0.03
1
1
10
0.5
24
10
20
0.8
0.05

5 E -5
1 E -4
32
20000
2000
0.03
1
1
10
0.8
24
8
10
0.8
0.05

3 E -4
1 E -4
24
20000
2000
0.03
1
1
10
0.5
24
2
4
0.8
0.05

5 E -4
1 E -4
24
20000
2000
0.03
1
1
10
0.5
24
3
5
0.8
0.05

Figure 5. The learning curves for results presented in Section 5. Each figure shows the average returns per episodes for these methods.

14

